Add Expressive Code to Starlight (#742)
withastro/starlight: docs/src/content/docs/reference/configuration.mdx

Configure the table of contents shown on the right of each page. By default, `<h2>` and `<h3>` headings will be included in this table of contents.

### `expressiveCode`

**type:** `StarlightExpressiveCodeOptions | boolean`

Starlight uses [Expressive Code](https://github.com/expressive-code/expressive-code/tree/main/packages/astro-expressive-code) to render code blocks on your site. The integration is enabled by default and can be disabled by passing `false` to this option.

You can customize your code blocks by passing an object with any of the following properties:

- `themes` — an array of themes that should be used to render code blocks. The following item types are supported in this array:
  - any theme name bundled with Shiki (e.g. `dracula`)
  - any theme object compatible with VS Code or Shiki (e.g. imported from an NPM theme package)

>   - any ExpressiveCodeTheme instance (e.g. using `ExpressiveCodeTheme.fromJSONString(...)` to load a custom JSON/JSONC theme file yourself)

Reviewer: Are you planning some kind of special Expressive Code support for more than 2 themes? I imagine the scenarios where this makes sense require some custom UI for picking the user-preferred colour theme?

Would there be an argument for making the Starlight option a little simpler and just have two `lightTheme` and `darkTheme` options? Or would the current array also automatically support e.g. light/dark/light high contrast/dark high contrast?

I’m also curious what actually happens if you provide more than two themes? Does only e.g. the first dark theme get used?

Author: Expressive Code supports any number of themes out of the box (not just "dark" and "light"), and I've already seen sites using this to provide additional theming options (non-Starlight if I remember correctly).

I've seen one site providing a three-state theme selector with options like "day", "sunset" and "night", and another adding a custom "high contrast" toggle that selects special versions of the dark and light themes when enabled (so effectively providing 4 themes in total, just like you mentioned in your comment).

I didn't want to limit this functionality to just two themes when EC is being used inside Starlight, so I just kept the same `themes` array option as provided by the upstream `astro-expressive-code` package.

If you provide more than two themes, the Starlight integration's `useStarlightDarkModeSwitch` option (which is enabled by default) will create CSS selectors that integrate with Starlight's default theme switcher by making the first dark theme available through `data-theme="dark"` and the first light theme through `data-theme="light"`, and all other themes through their individual names, e.g. `data-theme="my-custom-high-contrast-dark-theme"`.

Reviewer: Thanks for the explanation!

I’m thinking a bit about that last case using `data-theme`. We don’t necessarily have to solve this in this PR — we have a chance to break the API in a future minor before Starlight v1 if needed — but because you can’t have `data-theme` set twice on an element, setting `<html data-theme="my-custom-high-contrast-dark-theme">` would presumably override the general Starlight theme (switching it to the dark theme, which is our default when `data-theme="light"` isn’t set). So basically Starlight theme and EC theme are tied together. Obviously in the general case dark/light switching with Starlight makes sense though.

I guess this the case that the `useStarlightDarkModeSwitch` option solves? You set that to `false` and decouple the switching?

Author: Yes, you set this option to false and decouple the switching, and then you can either just define your own CSS, or you use the `themeCssSelector` option to switch syntax highlighting themes based on something other than `data-theme`. You can use classes there, other data attributes etc. - allowing them to coexist with Starlight's dark/light mode switch without relying on the same attribute.

Reviewer: Got it. OK! I think I’m happy to leave these two options as they are. I don’t think they’re super easy to understand or use for the advanced cases, but hopefully that’s a niche concern, and I don’t off the top of my head have any ideas on how to improve it 😁

Author: Ok, let's keep them like this for now then. If we or our users come up with better ideas in the future, I'm always happy to improve the options further. :)

Thank you for the thorough review and great discussions about the use cases!

>   Defaults to the dark and light variants of the "Night Owl" theme by Sarah Drasner, which are also exported from `@astrojs/starlight/expressive-code` as `getStarlightDefaultThemes`.

Reviewer: Instead of exporting this method (I’m assuming for cases where people want to use one of the two default themes?), what do you think of giving these string values people can use?

e.g. `themes: ['starlight-light', 'starlight-dark']` is the default and we resolve those two strings under the hood for people? Seems nicer than exposing the internal function which returns an array it is hard to pick one theme out of.

I think this is also the only place exposing `@astrojs/starlight/expressive-code` is necessary? In which case I think it would be a benefit of this change to avoid exposing that in package `exports`.

Author: Yes, I exported these to allow people to reuse our special Starlight versions of the the Night Owl themes in their own set of themes. I like the idea of making them accessible through a string value, and will add that in favor of the `getStarlightDefaultThemes` export.

Exposing `@astrojs/starlight/expressive-code` will still be necessary to allow users deeper customization without risking to run into package version conflicts by having to install their own copy of astro-expressive-code. I mentioned in [this earlier comment](https://github.com/withastro/starlight/pull/742#discussion_r1385148195) what the potential customization use cases are.

Reviewer: Aha, got it. Maybe we should make a exports-specific module for the public API? So users can’t accidentally import some of the internal functions that are exported to be used in Starlight’s `index.ts`?

Author: Great point! I'll do that and create a separate file for the export.

Reviewer: Thank again for helping me understand everything. I think this would then be the last outstanding point to tackle. In the meantime, I’ll also open another PR to your branch to tweak the docs a bit to match our general style a little closer.

Author: I have moved the exports into a separate file now as discussed. I also added an explanatory comment to the file to clarify its purpose, even including a simple usage example.

  **Note**: If you pass at least one dark and one light theme to this option, Starlight will automatically ensure that the displayed theme matches the current dark mode switch state. See the `useStarlightDarkModeSwitch` option to configure this behavior. If you turn it off, you will need to add your own CSS code to the site to allow manual switching between themes.

- `useStarlightDarkModeSwitch` — determines if CSS code should be added that automatically displays dark or light code blocks depending on Starlight's dark mode switch state.

>   Defaults to `true` if the `themes` option is not set or contains at least one dark and one light theme, and `false` otherwise.

Reviewer: Wondering what the use case for this option is? I think it’s potentially confusing because `false` does not say “I want always dark” or “I want always light”, so I guess it only really works well when you also set `themes` to a single theme?

My instinct would be to suggest removing this in favour of respecting `themes`: single theme persists across dark and light modes, two themes toggles with the dark mode switch. Unless we have a clear use case this solves for?

Author: If you leave this option undefined, the default behavior is meant to be just like you described and automatically respect what you configured in `themes`.

The use case I was thinking of when adding this option was to allow people to provide their own logic for code block theme switching (e.g. by adding custom UI to select a preferred syntax highlighting theme), instead of the code blocks reacting automatically to the Starlight theme switcher.

I can understand if you'd prefer leaving this option out until there are actual users requesting it to be added. Just let me know and I can remove it! :)

});
```

### `expressiveCode`

**type:** `StarlightExpressiveCodeOptions | boolean`  
**default:** `true`

Starlight uses [Expressive Code](https://github.com/expressive-code/expressive-code/tree/main/packages/astro-expressive-code) to render code blocks and add support for highlighting parts of code examples, adding filenames to code blocks, and more.
See the [“Code blocks” guide](/guides/authoring-content/#code-blocks) to learn how to use Expressive Code syntax in your Markdown and MDX content.

You can use any of the standard [Expressive Code configuration options](https://github.com/expressive-code/expressive-code/blob/main/packages/astro-expressive-code/README.md#configuration) by setting them in Starlight’s `expressiveCode` option.

> For example, to give your code blocks rounded corners, set the `styleOverrides.borderRadius` option:

Reviewer: I don’t love how this suggestion makes it sound like `styleOverrides` applies rounded corners specifically. Maybe something like this would work?

```suggestion
For example, set Expressive Code’s `styleOverrides` option to override the default CSS. This enables customizations like giving your code blocks rounded corners:
```

```js ins={2-4}
starlight({
	expressiveCode: {
		styleOverrides: { borderRadius: '0.5rem' },
	},
});
```

If you want to disable Expressive Code, set `expressiveCode: false` in your Starlight config:

```js ins={2}
starlight({
	expressiveCode: false,
});
```

> In addition to the standard Expressive Code options, you can customize your code blocks with the following Starlight-specific properties:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to the standard Expressive Code options, you can also set the following Starlight-specific properties in your `expressiveCode` config to further customize theme behavior for your code blocks :
```
This might be a bit wordy, but especially with no example below showing these configured inside `expressiveCode`, I think a bit of extra context, and especially when these are all theme-related, is nice for reinforcing that even though it's called "expressiveCode", this is where you configure EVERYTHING for your code samples.

#### `themes`

**type:** `Array<string | ThemeObject | ExpressiveCodeTheme>`  
**default:** `['starlight-dark', 'starlight-light']`

Set the themes used to style code blocks.
See the [Expressive Code `themes` documentation](https://github.com/expressive-code/expressive-code/blob/main/packages/astro-expressive-code/README.md#themes) for details of the supported theme formats.

Starlight uses the dark and light variants of Sarah Drasner’s [Night Owl theme](https://github.com/sdras/night-owl-vscode-theme) by default.

If you provide at least one dark and one light theme, Starlight will automatically keep the active code block theme in sync with the current site theme.
Configure this behavior with the [`useStarlightDarkModeSwitch`](#usestarlightdarkmodeswitch) option.

#### `useStarlightDarkModeSwitch`

**type:** `boolean`  
**default:** `true`

When `true`, code blocks automatically switch between light and dark themes when the site theme changes.
When `false`, you must manually add CSS to handle switching between multiple themes.

:::note
When setting `themes`, you must provide at least one dark and one light theme for the Starlight dark mode switch to work.
:::

> #### `useStarlightUiThemeColors`
> 
> **type:** `boolean`  
> **default:** `true` if the `themes` option is not set (= you are using Starlight's default themes), and `false` otherwise
> 
> When `true`, Starlight's CSS variables are used for the colors of code block UI elements (backgrounds, buttons, shadows etc.), matching the [site color theme](/guides/css-and-tailwind/#theming).
> When `false`, the colors provided by the active syntax highlighting theme are used for these elements.
> 
> :::note
> When manually setting this to `true` with your custom set of `themes`, you must provide at least one dark and one light theme to ensure proper color contrast.
> :::

Reviewer: Small tweak and then should be good to go!

```suggestion
#### `useStarlightUiThemeColors`

**type:** `boolean`  
**default:** `true` if `themes` is not set, otherwise `false`

When `true`, Starlight's CSS variables are used for the colors of code block UI elements (backgrounds, buttons, shadows etc.), matching the [site color theme](/guides/css-and-tailwind/#theming).
When `false`, the colors provided by the active syntax highlighting theme are used for these elements.

:::note
When using custom themes and setting this to `true`, you must provide at least one dark and one light theme to ensure proper color contrast.
:::
```

Author: Nice simplification, I like it!
